---
date: 2025-05-16T13:26:00
---
Plain text is the only durable data format.

If your data format is not in plain text, you don't own the data, even if it's
on your computer rather than a server in the cloud. Your data isn't locked up
behind someone's server, but access to your data relies on software tools that
are out of your control. You own the file, but you don't own the data.

For example, you might have a SQLite database with your data on disk. It's not
on someone else's server. Great! But you can't read SQLite without some type of
client. Maybe that's okay: SQLite is an industry-standard format, and you can be
reasonably confident that it'll be maintained in 10 to 20 years.

But say your data is in a lesser-known data format: perhaps a one-off format
serializing your data in a specific application. You have the data, but still
need a tool to read it. Will that tool run on future operating systems and
hardware? Windows 20? Perhaps it's a tool on macOS - did it survive the
transition to Apple Silicon? Will it survive the next one? _Are you confident
that these tools will be maintained _**for the next few decades?**_

This became more apparent to me after working on legacy projects at large
companies. Some of these projects use data formats with clients that haven't
been updated in 20 years. The only way to run these projects is to run them on a
Windows XP virtual machine; they're not compatible with anything newer. If you
need to run a virtual machine just to access your data, you're on thin ice.

If you want to own the data itself, not just the file your data is stored in:
use plain text.

As an aside: I'm not yet sure if I'm only referring to plain text, or if I can
broaden my point to all human-readable formats.
